Do you know where they're going to look like?
Hello and welcome to another episode of No Such Thing as a Fish, a weekly podcast coming
to you from the QI offices in Covert Garden.
My name is Dan Schreiber, I am sitting here with Anichesitsky, Andrew Hunter Murray and
James Harkin.
And once again, we have gathered around the microphones with our four favorite facts
from the last seven days and in no particular order, here we go.
Starting with you, Andy.
My fact is that there is a 16th century exercise manual which recommends exercises including
running, tennis and loud reading.
So two of those sounded quite sensible, running and loud reading.
No, it's about tennis, not good for you.
So this was actually posted on Twitter by a colleague Justin Pollard who was a historian
and it was an article which was based on something found by Joan Fitzpatrick who was reading
a dietary by Sir Thomas Elliott.
It does sound like someone with a speech impediment saying the word "diary" there.
But it is a dietary and it's called the Castle of Health.
So it's about all these different ways that you can gain health in your life and there
is a category of exercise called strong or violent exercise where he recommends all these
things you can do like digging heavy soil or doing resistance training which is, I don't
know if he invented this but basically you have to lift up your arms to the sides while
your friend is trying to hold them in place.
I don't think he invented most of it because it was all from Galen, wasn't it, and from
the classical people.
He was kind of translating what the classics had said.
There was another guy called Linnaker, not Gary Linnaker I don't think because it's spelled
different.
But he was doing the same thing at the same time but he was translating Galen from Greek
to Latin because he wanted doctors to be able to know this stuff but he didn't want
normal people to be able to tell what was wrong with them whereas Elliott thought no everyone
should be able to know what's wrong with them.
It's basically the doodling what's wrong with you if it's day, and I think we like Elliott,
right?
You could blow into wind instruments as well if you wanted to help your intestines work better.
Yes, also singing or crying.
Crying, apparently you read that, right?
And I did look into crying to see if it's good for you and according to, this is admittedly
from Quarress.
I'm not sure how true it is but it was asked.
They said if you cry for an hour then you would use up 78 calories and I worked out that's
about the same as 40 grams of ice cream.
So if you cry for an hour and eat 40 grams of ice cream, you're on a level thing.
No one's ever cried for an hour and eat that little ice cream after it.
Can I just quickly say one of the things you recommended in this text because we were
saying that he's recommending things in English to make them clear of normal people.
Yeah, I just want to read a sentence to you from the text.
As touching things, proceeding exercise, as much as it is to be feared, least by vehement
exercise, any of the excriments of the belly or bladder should hastily be received into
the habit of the body by the violence of the heat kindled by exercise, also least something
which is whole by, by heaviness of excriments or violence.
So he just goes on and on and on and he says that that's about a third of the way through
that sentence.
Do you know what that's about?
I think one of the things he's saying is you should warm up so you don't shit yourself
when you exercise.
Yes, he is saying that and he also, because he got this from Gaelin as well, he's saying that
you should always go to the toilet just before you exercise and the reason is if you don't
do that, then the exercise will kind of drive your waist deeper and deeper into your body
and you'll never be able to get rid of it.
Oh no.
But the body is not a never-ending pit.
If you drive your waist further and further down, it does emerge from the other end.
But we know.
That's what we know now.
But no, did he think it would go into your legs?
I don't think so.
Sure, we've got people within you, deeper and drive you.
It's more than like that, so when you get older and you've got this swollen feet, that actually
is based in some truth because if you do go for a run, you quite often get an attack of
diarrhea about 40 minutes in, don't you?
Do you?
I don't.
No, I don't either.
It's a very common thing, it doesn't affect everyone, but it affects a large proportion
of the people.
I don't maybe one quarter of the people in this room, for instance, I guess.
It's a bit like that time, you told us that when anyone drinks coffee, they shit themselves.
Again, these are all hypothetical, they're just things that I've read, and have read up a
lot on this sort of thing.
I guess pull a ratcliff, but I thought that was a fairly solid poo.
Oh, God.
From what I read.
I've never run anywhere for longer than 37 minutes, so I've actually never had this.
There you go.
Just add an extra three, you know.
James did a half marathon recently.
I did.
I ran for a lot longer than 37 minutes because I didn't run very fast, and I didn't
shit myself, which was the main thing I was aiming for.
Yeah, really.
Made some money for charity, didn't shit myself.
A good day all round.
Thomas Jefferson used to cure his diarrhea by riding horseback, and I believe without a
saddle, and that was, yeah, he claimed that cured his diarrhea in the first bout that
he had.
Wow.
Yeah.
What did the horse claim?
This time, Thomas Elliott, he was a bit of a professional suck up, because his first
book that he wrote was called The Book of the Governer, and it basically just said how great
kings are.
Oh, really?
Yeah.
All the way through.
It just says, oh, aren't kings amazing?
And then a few years later, he got a job from the king who sent him as his ambassador to the
Emperor Charles V.
Yeah.
So his job was to basically negotiate the divorce with Catherine of Oregon.
So he was working for Henry VIII, and he was one of the people Henry VIII sent to Europe
to say, look, the Catholics in Europe are really pissed off with me.
Can you make it all okay?
Yes.
And the Church of England was created.
But he was also quite cool, because he was a supporter of Learned Women, which was quite
unusual at the time.
This is the thing he sort of got from Thomas Moore, but he wrote a book called Defense of Good
Women.
And the idea was at the time, a lot of people thought it was quite bad for women to learn
to read or be educated or talk quite dangerous for them, but he said in his book Defense of Good
Women, it's good for women to be educated so that they can provide intellectual companionship
for their husbands.
Which is a step in the right direction, guys.
Yeah.
And the really out loud thing being good for your health was quite a persistent idea.
So I came across a thing written in 1816 called the Code of Health and Long Gevity, which
is another basically exercise manual book.
And it also said that loud reading and speaking are often good substitutes for other kinds
of exercise.
And it says, hence the longevity of school masters, because they don't really move around
very much.
But they do speak loudly a lot.
It also says that because speaking loudly is a healthful exercise, it's one reason why
women require less bodily exercise than men since they are often more laquacious.
I've got a lot of sexist facts today.
I didn't realize until researching this fact that reading aloud at parties and social gatherings
was a thing that we used to do.
Yeah.
I wonder if you've got all these looks on the tube.
No, it's such a wonderful world to be the idea that you would sit in a room and someone
would just read to you and you would all join in.
And there's all these examples of, in the 1700s, particularly women in letters correspondences,
sending each other recommendations for types of books to be read out loud while they were
doing certain things like Notting Work, for example, apparently Boswell's Tour of the
Hebrides is a fantastic book to be read out loud.
Just tying knots in pieces of string while you're notting.
Yeah.
But yeah, there's many examples of good books to be read for situations.
I'm sorry, we're sure it's not knitting.
It's said Notting, and so I assume that was a 17th century.
Anything that's not knitting is Notting.
No, good call.
It's one of those things that I just assumed.
Oh, that's a weird hobby at the past.
I don't need to look that up.
Yeah.
Maybe they were all sailors, these women.
They could have been making rope.
Yeah.
Is this what you're talking about, they're in factories, they would have people reading to
them.
They used to do that as well.
Yeah, yeah.
There was a cigar.
Monter Cristo cigars, in fact, are named after the fact that it was the favourite book to
be read out in the factory at the lectern.
Wow.
So that's what they say.
The guy who took over it rebranded the company, and one of their favourite books was
the counter-monter Cristo.
You don't have to work.
They were a fuck of a long time to get through the whole book.
I really want to quit my job, but he hasn't even got out of prison yet.
That's better though.
You want to have a long read to keep the factory work entertained.
If it was called the very hungry caterpillar cigar company, you'd have a lot of very bored
employees.
Right.
Okay, it's time for fact number two, and that is Chisinski.
My fact this week is that scientists in Georgia just blew a six metre wide soap bubble.
Wow.
What room did they do it in?
It's not the first question I was thinking of asking.
I just thought, that's wider than this room.
I think the room we're recording in now, and it's probably wider than most of the rooms
I am in my home.
They actually had to have a special, extra-large room built just for this bubble.
I can't believe you don't have a job as an interviewer on national television.
We're cutting live that, Andy, who was on the scene.
Presumably this wasn't the room back then.
Prince Andrew, what room was it at Peterings Press that you were in?
The whole main restaurant, eh?
All right.
So what room was it in?
It was outdoors.
It was outdoors, yeah.
I believe so.
Risky for a bubble, though.
But, potentially the best.
But, at least you can get one that big.
It's an outdoors, the biggest room of all.
I think I've certainly seen him practicing outdoors, or I didn't see where they did the
real thing.
Yeah.
But yeah, outdoors on the ground.
So this was a study published in Physical Review Fluids, and one of the authors was inspired
when he went to Barcelona, and he saw street performers blowing these.
They have those massive bubbles in his love, and they don't blow them.
They sort of weave them.
You know what I'm talking about?
It's a bit of rope in between sticks.
With sticks and rope.
And he thought how an earth is something so thin stay together when it gets so big, and
there's that pressure on it.
And so they tried to blow a massive one, and they did.
And they worked out the way of doing it, and it's not very interesting if you don't know
a lot about it.
Is this the biggest bubble ever made?
I believe it's the biggest soap bubble ever made.
Wow.
How big can bubbles get, I mean, how big is your room first of all, but then how big can
they get?
Is it like they can get...
I think we don't know a maximum.
Well, there are records.
So Guinness keeps a lot of records.
OK.
So 2015, the record was broken then.
I don't know if this new 6-meter one has beaten it, but the largest bubble then was 3,400
cubic feet in volume.
And that I genuinely have written down is about the size of a classroom.
It's probably why I was asking about the room thing.
But the weird thing about that is how do you measure, because it's not perfectly round,
and it's not an independent adjudicator from Guinness needs to turn up and measure it.
And what they did is they photographed it just as it was finished.
And then the scientist independently used photographs from...
I've written this down, orthogonal angles, orthogonal angles, which I've net is a term
I've never heard before.
But basically, I think photographed from a lot of different angles, and you build up
a picture of how big it is.
How big do you say that one was?
That was 3,400 cubic feet.
Yeah.
So this one that Anna's talking about was 100,000 litres.
So do you, Matt?
I am.
They said it was big enough to swallow a Volkswagen Beetle.
Nice.
That's big.
That is big.
You know, as you're saying, there's a bunch of bubble records.
I think my favourite one I found on the Guinness site is most bubbles blown with a tarantula
in the mouth.
That's an existing record.
Did you watch the footage?
No, I saw a photo.
There's a video of this guy who loves this tarantula, but he loves bubbles as well.
And he just pops his tarantula in his mouth and then blows bubbles with.
Is the tarantula allowed to help like blowing because you've got two people blowing, aren't
you?
That's true.
Has he really broken the record?
It's the weirdest record attempt you've ever seen, because he's just got a tarantula sitting
inside his mouth live, and it's his pet, it's his favourite.
And then he blows bubbles for a while, then it just crawls out of his mouth onto his hand.
And what was the previous record?
Were there lots of people who thought this was something that many people have done?
He got 119 bubbles blown in 30 seconds.
Surely he could just do one and he's broken the record.
Why bother?
There's also most people put inside a soap bubble in 30 seconds, and that's 13.
And this brings me to an important point, which might speak to what Andy said before
about the Guinness bubble.
So the putty inside the soap bubble, again, it's one of those ones on sticks where you sort
of people jump inside it and it's woven up through them.
And that's not a bubble as far as this study was concerned, because the bubble just needs
to go all the way around, this full sphere.
So I don't know if the one that broke the record was still being blown out of the aperture.
But I think the bubble needs to be self-contained, complete.
And it's an example of science being very clever.
The fact that bubbles will always try and be a sphere.
So if you've got a piece of string and you're told to lay out on a table with the biggest
possible area, then you'll naturally put it in a circle.
So if you've got a piece of string of the same length, a circle is a shape which will give
it the biggest area.
And in the same way, the bubble kind of knows that.
Well, when the first people who studied this was a guy called Antoine Plateau, he is probably
the world's first bubble scientist.
And he worked out that not only the bubbles always turn into spheres, if left on their own,
if you put them together, they always join an angle of 120 degrees.
What?
And again, there's mathematical reasons why this is the case.
It's all about packing and stuff like that.
But this guy Plateau is really amazing.
He had problems as a child.
He lost his parents and he had mental problems.
And so they sent him away to the country to get better.
Unfortunately, it was June 1815 and they sent him to the village of Waterloo.
Oh my God.
I know.
And so he was there when the battle was happening.
But then...
Was he all right?
He was fine because he managed to live to be a bubble scientist.
And the best bubble scientist there ever was, probably.
Well, his career started very well, didn't it, Plateau?
But then, unfortunately, it's kind of very good, very good.
And he did his bubble work despite being blind a lot of his work.
Because when he was older, he was blind.
He lost his sight in an experiment to see how long he could look at the sun.
Oh no.
He had to give us a record of its day.
Yeah.
Just an experiment.
Oh, that's wonderful.
Yeah.
But I mean, he's one of the greats in this field.
And he doesn't sound like that smart guy, does he?
He really doesn't.
Because Newton did that as well, didn't he?
Yeah.
Yeah, he did.
He reported that his eye's her afterwards and he went blind for a couple of days.
And so I don't know why people continue to do it.
Newton was an idiot.
He used to put bockins in the back of his eyes to see if he could look behind them.
Okay, come on.
Um, do you remember, I think I'm out of time, you guys, that I used to come on stage
every day after a bubble performer.
Did you?
Yeah, when we were doing ostentatious at the fringe, the act before us was the amazing
bubble man.
Cool.
What did he do?
Unbelievable things.
Was it big?
Was it a number of bubbles?
Was it a size, the shape?
Was it a tarantula involved?
No tarantulas that I saw, but I only ever saw the last 10 minutes of his act, but how big
was the room?
It was.
It was quite a big room.
He always demanded playing huge rooms, even though he was only about to help people.
He would, he did it quite like, he would, um, he did bubbles that he stabbed and then they
survived or he would make bubbles inside other bubbles and he would do bubbles filled
with smoke.
He would.
I made a bubble inside another, but like every child who's had bubble mixes done that.
What?
That's hard.
Well, that's so embarrassing, Andy.
Less time reading, more time blowing bubbles than a kid for you, so I would recommend it.
I was in one corner of the playground blowing bubbles and Andy was doing his jane ostentatious
improvisation at the other side.
Did he, um, spill some of his bubble juice on the stage and you kept slipping on it, because
it would be slippy, wasn't it?
It was very slippy, but he always mopped up very carefully afterwards, yeah.
But it was.
No, it was a messy old thing.
Yeah.
They call it bubble juice.
Did they?
Yeah, the, um, bubbles do.
Like the people.
And they're called bubbles.
The people who like bubbles are called bubbles, or if they really like it, they're called
bubble heads.
And they call the juice, bubble juice.
I think if you're being called a bubbler, you must like bubbles enough to be called a
bubble head.
Maybe not.
Come on, mate.
In all these subcultures, you need levels.
That's true.
Yeah.
I'm going to fall out of the stuff.
So I quite like bubbles.
Does that make me anything in this world?
No, I don't think so.
No, okay.
Yeah.
It's like saying, I've read all the Harry Potter's and someone says, what house are you sorted
into and you say, oh, I haven't done that.
You're not a potterhead.
You're just a reader of potter.
Okay.
That's a good analogy.
I'm fine with that.
Yeah, so it was pretty close.
And then I'm fine with that.
Are you fine with not being a bubble head?
No, I'm vivid.
And then you better get into it.
Because it is a quite big subculture, the bubblers.
And this actually was.
Getting bigger all the time.
I think it's going to burst.
So they were consulted heavily in the study that I mentioned at the start of this fact,
when the physicists were looking for advice on how to blow the best bubbles.
All these nerds, suddenly, their use became apparent because they were always exchanging
like, this is the best liquid to use.
This is the best.
Juice.
Sorry.
This is the best juice to use.
And actually, do you know what the best soap is?
No.
Well, it's not surprising, actually, if you watched the adverts.
Imperial leather.
Oh, it's not imperial liquid.
It's fairy.
Isn't it?
This is actually according to another study I read.
So studies on bubbles just abound.
It's a huge area.
And it is a 2006 paper called Giant Soap Curtains for Public Presentations.
And it's--
Soap Curtains sounds disgusting.
Yeah.
I don't even know what it's supposed to be, but it sounds disgusting.
I also very ineffective soap curtains.
I had a pair of soap curtains for this.
They kept that almost none of the light.
And there was always a rainbow outside.
So this, it was actually quite good.
It was by some physicists, too.
First of all, said the question we're always asked is, are we paid to do this?
No, we're high level researchers, which is doing this to spread the word.
And it was saying soap curtains are a really good thing to engage kids.
So it's basically like a huge soap bubble, but it's very flat.
It's drawn between two big poles.
And you sort of wash soap down it like a waterfall.
And it creates this constantly moving, long bubble.
Anyway, they looked into it.
And they said the best washing up liquid for surface elasticity
is a proctor and gamble, which is marketed as drift in Europe
and dawn in the US.
And fairy in the UK.
But if you're in France, terrible news
doesn't contain the crucial ingredient that makes it elastic.
It doesn't know.
So you can't blow such big bubbles in France.
What is it? Can you add it to it?
I don't actually know what it is.
I think it's probably some long chemical word.
But yeah, you'd have to add it.
You'd have to order your own from elsewhere.
Oh, wow.
So desulée.
That's very good.
On the bubble Wikipedia, they also asked what's the best bubble juice
in the FAQs and the answer is not quite so clear-cut.
It says, "Everyone has a different definition of the best bubble.
There is no actual best juice.
Because what one person defines as the best bubble
may not align with how another person
defines the best bubble."
It feels like there's a divorce behind that.
[LAUGHTER]
Is there a bubble--
do you mean there's like a separate mini Wikipedia
for bubbles?
Yes.
So these guys from Georgia, who Anna was talking about,
they went into a big online community of bubbles
like Anna says.
And I think one part of it was the bubble Wikipedia.
Yeah, so cool.
So cool.
And actually, bubbles is really important.
If you're studying it, bubbles are really important.
Because when you work out how they exist,
it can help you in glass making.
It can help you in other industrial processes.
I read one that's called, "It helps in building lab
on a chip bubble logic devices."
I don't know what they are.
So for all I know, there might be 100 of my phone.
And also artificial viruses for vaccines.
Oh, cool.
Do you need to learn about bubbles if you want to make those?
I found one other bubble that is not on Earth.
It's in space.
These are two super bubbles at the center of a distant galaxy.
They're massive cavities filled with gas.
And they're full of charged particles.
And the particles are 100 times stronger than we've
even made it certain.
They're 100 times stronger than any particles
found on Earth in terms of their charge.
Okay.
Charger stronger.
One of these bubbles is 3,600 light years across.
And the other one is 4,900 light years across.
Think of the size of room you'd need to--
[LAUGHTER]
Wow.
So yeah.
What happens if they pop?
I don't know.
But the Neptune's orbit around the sun
is less than 1,000th of one light year across,
just to put that in perspective.
Into a perspective that you still can't even begin
to understand.
Yeah, cheers, mate.
One other space bubble that's dangerous to humans
is the space bubble that we create.
So astronauts in the International Space Station,
when they go to sleep, when they exhale,
they build this bubble of carbon dioxide that sits
in front of their face.
That can be very dangerous.
So every astronaut, when they go to sleep,
they have to sleep with their head near an air vent
because they need that bubble pushed away from them.
Otherwise, they can suffocate on it,
wake up with huge migraines, potentially die.
You could just sleep with a very long straw in your mouth.
No, because then the bubble would start
at the end of the straw.
Thank god you're not.
You're just moving the problem.
Imagine if you were a NASA designer.
It wasn't really long straw, though.
I'm sure it would be fine.
What if you had-- you went to sleep and you
invented this thing.
It's like a tiny straw.
But as the time goes on, the straw gets longer and longer
and longer.
That's a good idea.
That's the Nokia straw.
Yeah.
You are lying after all, aren't you?
Absolutely right.
So good.
This thing sells itself.
One more thing about bubbles, which I really like,
is penguins.
We're not quite sure how they do this,
but we think they basically blow bubbles out of their beaks.
And then the bubbles go onto their body.
And when they're swimming, it means they can go quicker
through the water because the bubbles
mean there's left friction with the water.
Really?
And that's the only way they can get the speeds.
Well, you know a penguin kind of swims up
and then can jump out of the water onto the land.
Yes.
They won't be able to do that if they
didn't have bubbles around the whole body.
Wow.
And there's an idea that we could make ships
with a lot of bubbles around the hull.
And then that could cut fuel consumption by about 15%.
That's worth doing.
Very good.
Oh, get penguins to dribble on our ships.
And then where's that?
Just tie one penguin at the front of every ship.
With a straw could get bigger as well.
Yeah, put it in the place of that pointless, like,
fit-statch-ever woman that's always at the front of ships.
But that was the last time you saw a ship.
It was the last time you got a ferry to France.
I only traveled on Viking ships.
OK, it is time for fact number three.
And that is my fact.
My fact this week is that before she became famous,
Marilyn Monroe was named the Artechoque Queen
of Castroville, California, Miss Cheesecake
by Stars and Stripes magazine.
And Queen of the radio plane company
where she worked assembling military drones
during World War II.
So cool.
Look, interesting career moment.
She sort of had a lot of early prizes
before she became the true Marilyn Monroe.
Yeah.
But she even caught Marilyn Monroe that much.
She wasn't.
She was Norma Jean at that point.
She was at the time she got the Artechoque Queen.
Yes, that's true.
Yes.
Because that was at a time when she wasn't famous,
but she was almost famous.
Because she was on a promotional tour for Diamonds.
There was a guy who was selling Diamonds.
And he also was a movie star promoter.
And he wanted to promote his star by getting a young star
let in.
And he asked this star let called Doreen Nash
if she would do it.
She said, yes, she canceled it in the last minute.
And then Marilyn Monroe came along and did it instead.
But she was famous enough that she was
doing autographs and stuff.
Yes, exactly.
She was at that point.
She was given the sort of honorary role,
rather than having to compete for it.
She became the queen of the Artechoque.
Yes.
And what actually happened is she was in another,
she was in some like room or something.
And some guys who were like a room.
Tell me more.
And there was a load of Artechoque salesmen
who just saw their chance and then ran over to her
and gave her a sash.
Held a load of Artechoque's took a photo and that was it.
Yes, no.
There was nothing else happening there.
So these are the things that Marilyn Monroe
or Norma Jean did before she became super famous.
Well, they were in the '40s, weren't they, really?
And she, her first small break, I reckon, was probably
in World War II when she was working for this kind of,
as you said, like a drone company where she was,
so what they did was they had these remote control planes,
which the Americans wanted to use for basically reconnaissance,
I think, and she was spraying the parachute,
the mini parachutes for these planes, is that right?
And target practice, too.
Some of them were used for some of the drones
were just for anti-aircraft gunners to have a go on.
OK.
And OK, because then you don't have to fly the drone
as far away as you'd have to fly a full-size one
in order to get the corresponding target practice.
You don't have to kill a pilot every time you're doing anti-aircraft training.
The best of both worlds.
So many advantages.
So anyway, there was this idea that people
should start photographing women who were working
towards the war effort as part of this PR campaign,
pro-war PR campaign, and she was one of these women photographed,
and that was her first small break.
And the person who instructed this campaign to happen
was one Captain Ronald Reagan.
What was it, indeed?
So Marilyn Monroe may never have existed if a one for Reagan.
So when Marilyn Monroe first became more famous,
one of her things they tried to sell her as was an mm-girl.
OK.
That's mm-m-m-m-girl.
And that was in response to Anne Sheridan,
who was a previous actor, actually still there at the time,
but she was known as a mm-girl, because she had a lot of mm-f.
Oh, yeah.
OK.
And when people said, "Well, why are you calling Marilyn Monroe that, 'Mmm girl?'"
Her publicist said, "Well, it's because whenever she goes to Detroit, that's what people say. Whenever she walks past, they all go, 'Mmm, Detroit!'"
- "Why Detroit?" - "Well, according to her publicist, it's because people in Detroit can't whistle."
[laughter]
"What is this story, James?"
"That's what the publicist said. Why did the publicist just say her name is Marilyn Monroe?"
"Mmm, I know, and her middle name's Margaret Michael."
[laughter]
"It's a really stupid story. That's why I bring it up."
"People in Detroit can't whistle."
"It sounds like the panics lie of..."
[laughter]
I was looking a bit into her first marriage,
which is probably her at least no marriage, so a guy called James Doherty,
and they were married for four years in the late 1940s.
And he always said that he never claims to have any insights on Marilyn Monroe.
I never knew Marilyn Monroe. I knew and loved Norma Jean.
Spelt with an extra ear on the end, by the way, which no one ever does.
So, Jean was spelled J-E-A-N-E.
But he had a weird career.
He went on to work for the LAPD for basically his whole life,
where he helped to found and train.
And he was the lead trainer of America's first ever SWAT team.
- What I see. - You know, like a SWAT team, like elite police.
- Yeah. - Not a man who would go into hostage situations and stuff like that.
He also, when he was working as a policeman, at one stage,
he was doing crowd control at the movie premiere of a Marilyn Monroe film,
which was the, yeah, the asphalt jungle.
- Wow. - It seems a bit heavy handed to dispatch a SWAT team to Marilyn Monroe.
- Well, he, he, that wasn't really painful for him,
because he was never allowed to actually watch Marilyn Monroe film,
because his wife panned him.
I think you would be a jealous of him if you were the second wife to Marilyn Monroe.
But he had a really awkward incident when, in the 1950s,
he was asked to be on a reality TV show, which was to tell the truth.
It was called to tell the truth of the game show.
And they had a segment which they do on buscox,
which, where they bring sort of a number of people out,
and you have to guess which one of them is the real ex.
- Wow. - Yeah, yeah.
- And they had the contestants had to guess which one is the real ex-husband of Marilyn Monroe.
- Wow. - Did they guess him, do you know?
- I actually don't know if they guessed him right.
What I do know is he lied to his wife, so he could be on the show.
And when she found out, terrible like, as obviously she was watching TV.
- And there was only one channel at the time.
Incredibly stupid lie.
- So when she found out, she threw a pan at him.
- Oh, yeah. - She threw a pan, yeah.
- Well, they did do that in those days,
didn't they throw pans at each other?
- So this fact was partly about Marilyn Monroe being Artichoke Queen.
- Yes. - I found out a few other
- Queens. - Okay.
- Food related queens that America has.
There's a great article in the Wall Street Journal
which described the National Pork Queen,
the Ohio Queen of Beef, and various other queens.
And this is a thing where they all face off against each other
to be Miss Agriculture.
- Oh, wow. - So it's like a massive derby
of queens of different foods.
- Did they fight each other with massive cuts
of the meats that they had?
- Who would your money be on?
Would it be on the bacon, the sausage?
- I'm thinking a big cow corpse.
- Yeah. - Queen of Beef.
- If you could wield one of those, you're unbeatable.
- Definitely, because you're not gonna be in much trouble
up against the egg queen, which is another one of these queens.
There's a torn queen, wheat queen,
the separate lamb and wool queens, which is very weird.
Anyway, they have to be, you know,
there's a sort of element that they're all quite good looking young women,
obviously, because that's one of the things they have there.
But they also have to give speeches on the products they represent
and they have to converse while being watched by judges
about their chosen products.
And the judges are looking to see
who best represents farming spirit.
And then the winner gets crowned queen of agriculture
and goes around speaking about agriculture
and how important it is and all of this.
- Yeah, so if you're the egg queen,
do they ask you just questions about eggs
or are they asking, 'cause you're actually representing
the whole of agriculture, so you'd need to know about beef
and lamb and wool and everything?
- I think in these regionals,
you only have to answer questions on your specialist food.
I'm not certain by think I said.
But yeah, if you're promoted to queen of agriculture,
it's like if you've just been home secretary for years
and then you become Prime Minister or something.
How do you know about all the other departments?
- It's a really big step.
- It's a huge step.
I don't think they should be allowed this kind of responsibility.
- I think you should have to be every single minister
before you become Prime Minister.
- And every single queen.
- Yes.
- I think Boris Johnson needs to be a sausage queen.
(all laughing)
Actually, never mind.
- Sounds like a bit of prison terminology there.
(all laughing)
- Yeah, industry queens have been quite a big thing
for about 100 years, haven't they?
I think they kick, which are mascots for certain industries.
And I think we cover them a bit in the queue series of QI.
- We did, yeah.
- But if it's gone out, yeah, I'm not sure if it's gone out yet.
- Absolutely.
- I might have done.
- You may have seen this or you're about to see it on QI.
But they were people who represented their industries.
They would have a coal queen or railway queen.
And there's actually, we did cover the sausage queen
because 15 years old, and they were so important
and considered such diplomats for their industries
that they did things like this 15 year old sausage queen
was put straight on a train to Moscow in 1936
to meet Joseph Stalin.
And talk about how great British sausages were.
- Did she have sausages to present?
- She must have done.
- As per so.
- I've seen a picture where she's wearing sausages
around her neck and on her head and stuff.
- It's a very odd picture.
- Oh, that's a weird cra--
- She's wearing a sort of hula skirt made of sausages.
- Yeah.
As Stalin, you would have to think,
"These people are trying to take the piss, aren't they?"
- Yeah.
- I'm in charge of Russia.
And they're sending their sausage queen.
- Apparently they do great diplomats.
Well, that's one of the main reasons
that Russia eventually joined other side
in the second world war.
It's thought it was because of her.
- Okay, it's time for our final fact of the show.
And that is James.
- Okay, my fact this week is that there is a salamander
in Bosnia who hasn't moved from the same spot
since 2010.
- Was it, and was sure it's alive?
- Well, I'm not sure it's currently alive.
I'm sure it was alive in 2018 when they last checked.
It might have moved since then.
But I'm assuming if it stayed in the same place
between 2010 and 2018,
it probably is still there.
- Yeah.
- Is that fair to assume?
- I think so, although it's so.
- In the study that was done,
there was a suggestion that they can't be positive
it hasn't moved.
It might have gone away and just returned
by the time they go back.
- Every time they checked, it was always
in exactly the same spot.
- Yeah.
- But that doesn't mean that it's sneaking off
and then when it sees them coming, it runs back in.
- Yeah, it's possible.
- It's like having a toy story toys.
- Exactly.
- As soon as the kid come back in the room,
obviously they're going to be back in the same place.
- Back to your places, yeah.
- Okay, so this is an Olm.
It's a white salamander.
It's known in Bosnia as the human fish
because it has a pink skin color.
And there is a couple of scientists in Budapest,
whose names I'm not going to try and pronounce.
Gurgly Balash, maybe.
- Gurgly Balash.
(laughing)
- It's joking on water or something.
- It's a strong name.
- Imagine it's not that at all.
You just completely, someone said,
"Hey, you're on the...
"No such thing as a fish podcast, a sweet couple."
(laughing)
- Unfortunately, he was once asked to introduce himself,
and his name's just Balash,
but he was just following a mouthful of water at the time.
(laughing)
- Well, actually, I mean, he was diving into the water
to inject these Olms with a pigment.
And each Olm, they injected with a different shape of pigment.
And then every now and then,
they'd come back and see where they were.
And the idea was to see how much they're moving.
And it turns out that most of the Olms move less than 10 meters.
And about five meters per year was typical.
And the most active Olm they found
moved 38 meters in 230 days.
And then the guy who I'm talking about
was found in exactly the same spot
after 2,567 days.
(laughing)
- More than seven years.
- It's really amazing.
- And the other thing,
I mean, Olms are incredible
because they can survive a very long time without eating.
- Yes. - And they've got, I think, they've tested some
'cause they have a lab in France,
because they're very endangered these things.
And one Olm is known to have survived 12 years
without eating anything. - Yes.
- Yeah. - Yeah.
- They just, like, one little crustacean comes along
and they just gobble it all up.
They can eat it whole.
And then it'll just take them all that time to digest it.
And they'll just sit around doing nothing
until the next one comes along.
- Well, thinking.
I think they're meditating.
They're all sitting there just going,
"Oh!"
(laughing)
- I've actually seen Olms live in the pale flesh.
Yeah, I went to Slovenia.
And in the post-Jana caves,
they have this...
You're underground.
You're in this incredible cave system.
And then they've just got this booth.
It's so weird seeing this metal booth.
And it's like a terrarium for these Olms.
And they, you can look at them.
And they keep them there partly to educate the public
and partly to conserve them.
And they're there.
- Did you see the move?
- No, I didn't see the move.
They stayed very still.
In fact, I have a prop with me,
which I've left downstairs related to this.
- Great.
(laughing)
- Shall I go get it?
- Is it going to be good radio?
- No.
- Get it.
(laughing)
- Oh, my God.
- Okay, well, one of these away.
- I'm not saying people were at Olms.
(laughing)
- I'm just sad because you can't hear it.
If you said, don't say anything more about Olms while I'm gone.
- Look, I want to get the prop.
- He's going to get the prop.
So, what are we going to say about Andy while he's away?
- Who is going to replace him?
- Oh, yeah.
- And the next few months.
- If you want to replace Andy on those things are first,
then please write to podcast@ky.com.
- Yes.
- Qualifications?
- Great props.
(laughing)
Always bring your props with you.
It's very important.
(laughing)
- Okay, so Andy has returned.
- He's been eating off.
- Please.
- He's going to turn the heating off.
- It is something that can't survive in high temperatures.
- Kind of, because it's a model Olm.
- Wow.
- So, Andy, you want to explain what Andy's just put on the table?
- Yeah, so it's a soft toy penis.
(laughing)
It's an Olm.
- If your penis has four legs down,
then you need to get a look.
(laughing)
- Yeah, it's a little soft toy Olm.
I just brought it because I bought it at the caves
and I wanted to show you that.
- Yeah, it's really cool.
I mean, it is quite phallic.
- It is, yeah.
- This is a lot bigger than the ones they have in the caves.
(laughing)
It's tiny and they've really both beefed this up
for the blush toy version.
- Well, you've just turned the heating off,
so it'll probably get smarter in the next few minutes.
(laughing)
- Anyway, I just, I couldn't,
we couldn't do it without me bringing in the soft toy.
- This whole book doesn't work without you bringing this off toy.
- Maybe you should put a picture of the Olm
on your Twitter account.
- Where are we going to do this?
- What does it have a name?
- No, it doesn't yet.
- I would call it Sherlock Olms.
- Brilliant.
- Ah, very strong.
- Terrible at solving crimes, if you can't.
(laughing)
You just, it's like heating.
You just have to hope a crime happens directly in front of you.
(laughing)
- So, what, what more can we say about Olms?
- Well, David Attenborough loves them.
- To see.
- So he picked them in 2012 as one of the 10 endangered species
he'd take on his own personal arc.
And guys, we're not even there.
I guess we're not endangered.
- This is so weird, 'cause I have a salamander related
Noah's Ark fact, which is that.
So this is not on related.
So there's just a brief step away from Olms.
But there's a giant salamander in China,
which is absolutely massive.
There are about five feet long.
They weigh about 60 kilos.
And the very first fossil of it found
was one of the earliest fossils discovered by humans.
- Okay.
- And it was named Homo Deluvie Testis,
which means human witness of the flood.
Because people didn't know what this salamander fossil was.
And it was thought to be a person who had died
in Noah's flood.
- Wow.
And if any of you at home thought it meant human floodballs.
That's just, you know, you learn your lesson better.
- Not just at home.
Most Chinese salamanders are eaten in some parts of China.
I think they are on the endangered.
- They're endangered.
- They are endangered.
So don't do it kids.
But they used to eat salamanders in the Southern USA,
especially in times of poverty.
And there is one theory that the term hush puppies
originally referred to as salamander.
Because a hush puppy, before it became like a type of shoe,
is it?
- Yeah.
- It was like a tiny bit of food that you would eat.
And the idea was, these salamanders were also known as water puppies.
And the hush came from the fact that people didn't want to know
that they were eating this stuff because it was a poverty food.
It's either that, or it was like a little bit of food you gave to a dog
to keep it quiet, it could be that as well.
- How did that become a shoe?
- Well, no, the branding is a dog, right?
- I didn't know that.
- Yeah, yeah, I don't really know that.
- So sorry, is the branding about hot to make your puppy hush
kick it with this shoe?
- No, no, no.
- No, no, no, no.
- The adverts were controversial at the time.
- Just one more thing about the giant Chinese salamander.
It's very cool because it also generates glue.
And this is really glue that might be actually very useful.
So it's a Cretaceous mucus.
And it was a Cretaceous mucus if you gently scratch it, apparently.
And so researchers have been investigating this to see
if it can be used as a medical adhesive.
And apparently it's a more effective medical adhesive
than any other naturally occurring glue found in the world.
And it's much more flexible than synthetic adhesives.
And so they think that maybe we could use it to seal wounds in the future.
So people who are good at Latin, who are all of our listeners,
but not me, would know when I say that salamanders often
have mental glands where on their body they would be.
It comes from the Latin mentum, not men's, so men's is mind.
But it's from mentum.
- Mentum.
- Is that a joint?
- They're tongue.
- Oh, they're chin.
- Chin.
- How did you get that?
- Yes, so they have mental glands from the Latin mental meaning chin.
And they secrete ferrimones.
So when salamanders want to have sex, the male rubs his chin
on the back of the female.
And he secreets the ferrimones onto her back with his chin.
- Oh nice.
- And then that gets her in the mood.
- Very sexy.
- Yeah, very sexy.
I didn't find out how Olm's made themselves.
I mean, I guess it's hard if you don't ever move from your spot.
- They made, I think they're some of the only amphibians.
They're not the only amphibians that mate internally rather than laying eggs.
Is that right?
- Okay.
- So I think they have actual sex, which is nice.
- I think they do have a period of activity where they just suddenly all just go,
"Okay, let's do the stuff we need to do and just one go."
- That's great.
- Yeah.
- That's like a Saturday morning.
Just get everything out of the way and then the rest of the weekend you can just relax.
- Exactly.
- So just on Salamander, sort of type of Salamander, right?
And I didn't realise there was this persistent belief throughout all of history
that Salamander is a fireproof.
- And what?
- From ancient times people, there was this rumor that Salamander is a born from fire
and they're totally resistant to it.
They're so cold, they can just walk through fire.
It was also thought that Asbestos was Salamander here because you know Asbestos looks like a hairy.
And it's fire resistant.
And so everyone thought that Asbestos was just the shed hair of Salamander.
- I mean, it only takes one experiment.
- You bizarrely, Pliny actually did it, and it was proven to be incorrect.
And he went on to believe it.
- Well, there must be a Salamander there.
- Yeah.
- That's why he thought he was just proving.
- And it was so persistent that even in the 19th century,
people still thought Salamanders were fireproof.
To the extent that you had human Salamanders, which were popular entertainers,
and they were performant fairs.
And this was across Europe.
And their trick was they wore these big Asbestos cloaks.
And so a lot of them probably ended up quite ill.
With these big Asbestos cloaks and gloves and shoes.
And then they'd walk through bonfires.
And they were called human Salamanders.
- Cool.
- And their trick was it was most impressive if they take a raw steak into the middle of a bonfire.
And then they'd stand in there and then they'd come out and the steak's cooked.
- That is quite clever.
- Hopefully they're not.
- They could have the human oil in the other part of the circus, just kind of sitting there.
- Yeah.
- Just don't look waiting for the crowd to come fast.
- Oh no.
- We love it.
I mean, literally people do that in Covent Garden, don't they?
- The human statues.
- The human statue.
- That's true.
- I'm going to start calling them human alms.
- Yeah.
- Okay, that's it.
That is all of our facts.
Thank you so much for listening.
If you'd like to get in contact with any of us about the things that we have said over the course of this podcast,
we can be found on our Twitter accounts.
I'm on @Srivaland.
Andy.
- @AndryHunterM.
- James.
- James Harker.
- And Chazansky.
- You can email.
I forgot.
I don't know.
I was waiting for the old to give his Twitter account.
You can email podcast@QI.com.
- Yeah.
Or you can go to our group account, which is @NoSuchThink.
Go to our website as well.
NoSuchThink is a fish.com.
Check out all of our previous episodes.
We'll see you again next week.
Goodbye.
[Music]
Oh, I meant to say "olmes under the hammer."
[Laughter]
Say it now, click.
Olmes under the hammer.
Would be a good TV show.
- Yeah.
- Omelie Connect.
- And "olmes and gardens" magazine.
It's just pictures of "olmes and gardens."
Olmes sweet "olmes."
- So the recipe?
[Laughter]
- You'll find a place to put that in it.
- I'm sure I'll find somewhere.
You know that better than the end where I put all the really shit jokes.
[Music]